Person Discussion
Dr. Hibbs O.K., uh, first of all thanks for coming out tonight. The older I get the
more I treasure my leisure time. So, I know you could all be doing
something else, and I appreciate you coming out here and spending uh,
some time with us tonight. Although I have 20 years experience in
retailing, all of which are in the swimming pool business and therefore
think I know a little bit about retailing. I also know enough to know that
the key success factors are much different from business to business. So
that’s one of the reasons why we are here, is to try to determine what it
would take to, uh, locate businesses along the Schuylkill River Heritage
Area that would be successful, and I can’t think of a better place to start
in trying to determine, o.k. If this is something viable, if this is something
do-able at a profit. I can’t think of a better place to start than to talk to
those people who are in the business, o.k. So we are basically here to do
exploratory research, uh, which is a fancy way of saying, uh, let’s put all
the ideas on the table. No idea is a good idea or a bad idea, so a lot of
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 1Dr. Hibbs,
Continued
ideas come in, over time we apply a bunch of filters to those ideas, and
what should end up spitting out in the end is some locations that we think
stand the best chance of succeeding, o.k. So that’s what we are here for
today. Let’s get started. The purpose of the meeting is to get your
feedback on several topics related to the Schuylkill River Heritage Areas’
recreational development of the area. Specifically your thoughts on
creating a recreation area that will meet the needs of the residents in the
region, and how the Heritage Area can help create an atmosphere in
which local businesses can start and thrive. The Heritage Area has
enlisted the help of Kutztown University, and that’s what brings us here.
Now, one of the problems with doing this kind of stuff is, it seems like
it’s hard to get going. And the reason why I’m saying that at this point is
because before we can really get going, we kind of have to know a little
bit about the players, try to become a little bit comfortable with who’s in
the room. So, I figured if we could go around the room and learn a little
bit about each other. We can get an idea of what your backgrounds are
and by getting a little better idea of what your backgrounds are, that
might facilitate, you know, Jim and I asking some follow up questions,
asking for your input at different spots. So, again, I guess I will go to my
right first if that’s o.k. Hugh, will you start?
Hugh Sure, I’m Hugh Kelly, and presently I own Kelly’s Canoe & Kayak,
which is located about 5 miles from here. We’ve been selling boats there
for approximately, I guess 22 years and uh, we got into the business sort
of in a small way at first because we had a garden center to begin with,
and then we started selling a few canoes, and 5 years ago we closed down
the garden center, and went 100% with the canoes and kayaks. And we
maintain about, oh, 175 boats in stock usually all the time, and we have
all kinds of accessories. Practically everything you find in the catalog we
have in stock for that particular end of the business. My wife and I do
most of the (?) and we have part time help that help us run it. We don’t
do any rental.
Dr. Hibbs Hugh, because I’m nervous.
Hugh Yeah, yeah?
Dr. Hibbs Some things go in one ear and out the other.
Hugh Yeah
Dr. Hibbs Did you say where you were located?
Hugh Yeah, I’m located about 5 miles from here, closer to Gilbertsville. If you
were right out here on Route 422 and getting onto Route 100, hit your
trip odometer and when you’ve gone 4.8 mile you’ll see a bunch of
camping trailers, there you would hang a right on Grocer Road, and
we’re just down there.
Dr. Hibbs And about how long?
Hugh Huh?
Dr. Hibbs In business?
Hugh In business? Well we’ve been in business since 1972.
Dr. Hibbs And how long has it been since it evolved into..
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 2Hugh Uh, the business has been the last 22 yrs., 5 yrs the layout has been just
boats.
Dr. Hibbs So you’re seasoned huh?
Hugh And also the Christmas trees. We grow Christmas trees. We had the
garden center and nursery there. We do a lot of different things.
Dr. Hibbs Very good. Thanks for coming, there’s sure a lot of experience there.
Mike, if you would.
Mike Yes, I’m Mike Friedland, I’m with French Creek Outfitters in
Phoenixville, PA, and uh, we’ve been open 10 yrs. Uh, we’ve been
selling boats for all of those 10 yrs. We used to be located right here in
North Coventry up on Rte.100, we’re located now on Rte. 23 in
Phoenixville. We have a large, uh, we have a lot of other things other
then boats in the store, but the canoes and kayaks in particular have been
growing rapidly in the last 5 years or so. And we’ve increased our
inventory and the department size as a result. That’s basically it for me.
Dr. Hibbs Let me ask you a question. So you are seeing the canoe segment of
boating is growing?
Mike It’s not necessarily canoes, kayaks in particular. Canoes are actually
dwindling a little bit. Kayaks are kind of taking over.
Dr. Hibbs Alright. Jack?
Jack My name is Jack Gifford, and I am employed by Fred Beans in Limerick.
I am more interested in the trail because of bicycle commutes back and
forth to work. I am gonna be one of the guys using the trail, and its
facilities. I’ve already used the trail back and forth between Valley Forge,
and Philly, and back. I think Pottstown has the most to gain from the
trail, opposed to it’s location, I wonder if it could be like a trailhead for
this sort of place. It gives people a place to drive to with their car and
bike, and parking, plenty of it. Then for people coming out of Philly for
this could be a destination because there’s places to go, uh cause when
the Perkiomen Trail got finished there’s rides every week from Philly up
to that, and there’s nothing to do in Perkiomenville. Just to turn around
and go back.
Dr. Hibbs So let me get this straight Jack. You work for an automobile dealer…
Jack Yup.
Dr. Hibbs And you’re looking to ride a bike to work?
Jack I do ride a bike to work, about 7 yrs. now. I ride about two thousand
miles a year.
Dr. Hibbs This is very relevant to you. Vernon.
Vernon Yes, right now I’m with Appalachian Outfitters in Port Clinton. Started
out think’ I was going to sell canoes, and I didn’t realize that canoes
aren’t moving. Basically selling mainly kayaks as far as the boating
industry goes, ah, also sell backpacks, sleeping bags. The Appalachian
Trail comes right through Port Clinton so I see plenty of “thru” hikers at
my store, people going 2200 miles on a trail, not 110.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 3Dr. Hibbs Are you aware, excuse me for interrupting. Are you aware of any
“counts” on the trail in that area?
Vernon Counts?
Dr. Hibbs Has anyone done any “counts” as to how many people come through
there at any given point and time?
Vernon I know how many come through my store.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., I didn’t know if someone’s doing actual counts on the trail
knowing what the traffic is through there.
Vernon As far as “thru” hikers go, about 700 I see a year.
Dr. Hibbs O.K.
Vernon That’s about it.
Dr. Hibbs How long were you there?
Vernon 3 years
Dr. Hibbs 3 years?
Vernon Yup
Dr. Hibbs Do you think you are out of the woods yet as a business?
Vernon No honestly. I just got a big curve ball thrown at me. Cabela’s is one and
a half miles from me.
Dr. Hibbs I’m sure that will come up in conversation today. We’ll see what
happens. And you are….
Marcie Marcie, I’m Vernon’s wife
Dr. Hibbs How long have you been married?
Marcie 2 yrs. in December
Dr. Hibbs So you knew what you were getting into, and you still got into it?
Marcie Well kind of, yes.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., Bryan
Bryan Hi, I’m Bryan Hoover. I’ve worked a couple of jobs, and decided to look
for something else. I was unemployed for a 6 month period. So, I looked
at the business I needed, and the trail. I wondered if people would ride
surreys, like down on the boardwalk, at the shore on the trail, and that’s
kind of how it started. I think that as of March or May I had the idea, and
July 24th I kicked it off. So now, um, I’m renting surreys from the Spring
Mount trailhead, north to Green Lane on the Perkiomen trail for the last 3
months. So, that’s kind of been my experience, or what I’ve learned
about who rents that type of vehicle or not.
Dr. Hibbs You’re in bicycles?
Bryan No, surreys. I talked with people at the shore and they said 60 to 75% of
their business is the surreys. Even though they rent bikes, and all kinds of
other stuff. So I thought I’d try that on a small scale, and see what
happens. So I just went with it this year.
Dr. Hibbs It’s a small world. When I am over on the Perkiomen Trail riding my
bike, and I see him there, and I start talking to Bryan. I see him there
another time, and I talk to him, and here he is.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 4Bryan One connection actually. When I talk to people about what area they’re
from, and they talk about community revitalization in town there. So
that’s how I kicked off being at that location because I knew that
Schwenksville was working on trying to attract businesses in that area.
Dr. Hibbs Did they try to attract you?
Bryan Yeah, I think they still, you know, the trail that they completed through
that section this summer, um, well it turned out a lot hillier, and that may
work for me, I’m not sure where I’ll be.
Dr. Hibbs So you’re good in one direction basically. That one side is flat, and then
there’s the other side of the mountain. They were trying to attract you.
What did they do to try and attract you?
Bryan I just went to Borough Hall, and talked to the top designer there, and he
got all excited right away, and I guess that (?), I’m not sure what
organization did a study, and they had a little booklet, and everything that
they were trying to work at, so they were real excited about me staying
there. They have the lumberyard there that wanted to put some businesses
there. Eventually a trailhead, a restaurant, that type of thing. So, they
have some plans for there. I think they are falling behind schedule
though.
Dr. Hibbs Are these formal plans? Or is this just people talking to you?
Bryan No, there’s a formal booklet. I was going to bring it tonight but I forgot.
But it’s like a 40 page booklet, pretty involved.
Dr. Hibbs This is probably a dumb question, but are you aware of this?
Doc Ogden Would it be possible if you sent me a copy of that booklet, and I can send
it back to you?
Bryan Yeah, I can find the copy.
Doc Ogden I’m pretty trustworthy
Bryan Yeah, no problem
Dr. Hibbs O.K. I can’t read it from here.
Aaron Aaron Weilerstein. I’m with the Philadelphia Canoe Club. A different
role than many of you. The canoe club is, we’re located where the West
Haven Creek comes into the Schuylkill River, so right on the river at the
base of Manyunk in Philadelphia. The club has been there for about 100
years. Its 100th birthday is this year. Um, the clubs activities have
changed over the years, but at the moment it’s mostly a club of
recreational boaters who are involved with canoeing and kayaking. A lot
of them are white water boaters, some are moving water and sea
kayakers, but in terms of what we participate in on the Schuylkill, it’s
mostly from Flat Rock Dam down to Boathouse Row.
Dr. Hibbs You have some interesting input here because you have an idea of the
range of canoers or kayakers. You know what I’m saying? The sense of
people that do it once in awhile, the people that are regular at it, and
those people who live by it. And that’s kind of something that we are
interested in. You’re going to have some info there, I’m sure.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 5Aaron From the view of the user I guess.
Dr. Hibbs Yeah if you could make your name on there real clear and large for me.
Aaron Sure. My handwriting has never been good.
Dr. Hibbs O.K. who do we have next?
Deirdre Deirdre
Dr. Hibbs Deirdre
Deirdre I’m the chief planner for Valley Forge National Park, and I came because
I have been doing some talking with Kurt and his staff about what’s
going on in the National Heritage Corridor. I actually worked on the
corridor 15 yrs. ago. So I still say Heritage Corridor. We get about one
and a half million visitors a year to the park, and 80% of them are
recreational visitors. People who are not coming to look at the historical
buildings. People who come to bike, walk, hike, and ride the horses.
We’re trying to figure out what we should be doing for recreational
purposes. What services we should be providing, how recreation could
help us build some of our many, many empty historic buildings that we
have no money to keep standing. So this seems like a natural way to
generate a lot of interest at once. The Schuylkill River Trail opened in the
park in the summer of 002, and um the first couple of months and full
months in August and September we saw 40 or 50 thousand bikers a
month. We do have a counter, we don’t think it’s accurate. We have a
bean counter.
Dr. Hibbs Is that a before or after number?
Deirdre Well before there was nothing.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., so this is only on that trail. Unrelated to the normal trail that you
would get on Valley Forge to go to Manyunk.
Deirdre We are a nexus of trails. We have the Schuylkill River Trail, and other
river trails that connect to the Schuylkill River Trail, not the Perkiomen,
we’re trying to connect. Chester County on the southern side is working
on cross-country trails. We had 28 miles of trails in the park already.
We’ve got a water trail. We’re talking with Berks County and the
Heritage Corridor about putting in a new landing at Ponds Rd. There’s a
parking lot there now for the park, it’s to steep. We’re talking to the
county about combining with them to so something. We’re interested in
not doing things that would cause us to have to put in more parking. One
of the things that I want to get across is how we can spread the parking
lots up and down the trail still allowing people to come in the far end. We
have people come in on bikes, and cars.
Dr. Hibbs So, that’s a lot of access issues you’re talking about then? Correct?
Deirdre It’s more opportunities than issues.
Dr. Hibbs You’re interested in access opportunities then. O.K.
Bob My name is Bob Smith. I represent Schuylkill River Keepers. And our
concern is more for the river than the businesses that would be along the
banks of the river. However, we recognize that’s all part of it. We’re
interested in having some input, interested in hearing your input. And last
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 6Bob,
Continued
but not least I have been a canoeist for some 20 yrs. I have done the
Schuylkill at least 20 times. I’ve done it 4 or 5 times with the Gray Lines
on their sojourn. And probably will do it some more. But I have concern
from Pottsville, and even a little above Pottsville to Fairmount Park and
Fairmount Dam in Philadelphia, and everything in between, and I would
feel better if I saw some more Vernons.
Dr. Hibbs Some more what ?
Bob Some more Vernons. I feel a lot better about that.
Jim Jim Hartman, mostly representing the Keystone Canoe Club. I’ve been
involved in canoeing for, I don’t know, about 30 yrs. My interest is more
as a user than a business. I’m obviously interested in what’s going on
here to.
Dr. Hibbs I think that’s the great part of what I see so far, is that there are people
looking at this from very different angles, and unless you have that, you
run the risk of developing tunnel vision. I mean you come up with ideas
where you flatter yourself. But they don’t mean anything to anybody
else. I think it’s great, the range of experience and types of interest that
are represented here. O.K., very good. I appreciate you doing that
because it still seems like we’re trying to get started here. So, let’s get
started. O.K. Alright, site selection input and major output by the study.
Kutztown University is providing retail site selection information for an
outfitters type store. Outfitters’ is used very loosely here. In other words
it could be something as simple as just renting kayaks at a location. Or it
could be a whole lone outfitters store. I don’t know what categories or
merchandise they would sell, but anyway. So, outfitters here is used very
loosely, o.k. Type of store, or stores used along the Schuylkill, so today’s
topic will focus on site related questions.
Dr. D. Ogden Roger, I do have a question. Does anybody actually rent kayaks and
canoes or is it just selling?
Mike Last of the Mohicans, huh.
Dr. Hibbs That’s an interesting comment, Last of the Mohicans.
Mike Yeah, an unintentional pun. Because I don’t know any that’s renting
canoes or kayaks on the Schuylkill anymore.
Dr. Hibbs Is that the Schuylkill in specific, or is the same thing happening on the
Delaware?
Mike No, just the opposite on the Delaware. It’s thriving on the Delaware, has
been for years.
Dr. D. Ogden What’s the biggest drawback, liability?
Mike No, I think it’s two fold. I think, well we may be getting ahead of
ourselves a little bit, but one was the liability issue. Which was certainly,
you know, a big thing, But the other is that the Schuylkill for whatever
reason is not thought of as a “scenic” river, clean. Most people think of
the Schuylkill as an open sewer. Which we all know, since we’ve been
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 7Mike,
Continued
on it. That it’s not true. But it’s a perception thing. I’ve been on it quite a
bit. Mostly in a fishing capacity. Most of the time I’ve had it to myself.
Very, very few people using it, at least from Birdsboro down this way.
Now below you get a lot of activity, down around Flat Rock and places
like that. But certainly this section, there doesn’t seem to be much.
Dr. Hibbs Mike, you talk about perception there, the Schuylkill still being dirty,
o.k. Do you know of any studies or any evidence that it is the same as the
Delaware? Is it the same as the Schuylkill? Is it the exact same in these
places or one is really not different than the other.
Mike No I don’t know what it is about the Delaware. And it had that perception
for many years, but somehow broke out of that some time in the 80’s I
guess
Dr. Hibbs I remember we used to dig for freshwater clams along the side
Mike The Schuylkill is amazingly clean, I mean in this area anyhow. I’m
amazed.
Bob I had that same perception. Don’t talk much. Be careful, there’s a process
of bringing suit. Our fellow government is in the process of bringing a
suit against the city of Reading, for the dumping of raw sewage that
comes from the river.
Wayne There was this report released called the (?) Status Approval. Basically it
was an indicator of how the river was doing. We have copies of it.
Basically it has improved over the years but still has a long way to go.
Dr. Hibbs Yes, but what I’m asking. Is it much different than the Delaware or is it
pretty much the same?
Wayne The Delaware seems to be much cleaner.
Bob Especially around Trenton. The Delaware is cleaner overall. The upper
Delaware from Hancock down to Marysville, alright, is pretty pristine.
There’s not a lot of industry there, and businesses are not polluting the
river, per say. Once you get down below Trenton, the Delaware is, well
the Delaware. That happens. Whereas the Schuylkill has some problems
all the way from Pottsville. Years ago, alright, the Schuylkill was the
place where all the mines of the county washed their coal. The Schuylkill
was polluted almost to the point where you could almost walk across it
on the top of the water from Pottsville to Philly.
Dr. Hibbs In the 20’s and 30’s didn’t it catch fire once in awhile?
Bob That’s what they say, I’m not sure I buy into that.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., if we can move on a little bit. What do you think most people are
looking for? I have a list here. Now when I say “most People” here we
recognize that different people are looking for different things, different
experiences on trails, and in the water. So we recognize that, but here
we’re interested the mythical “most” people. I’m going to say 80% of the
people, just to throw a number out there. What are they looking for in a
walking trail, a hiking trail, a jogging trail, and a biking trail? What are
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 8Dr. Hibbs,
Contineud
they looking for? And if we can let’s take them one at a time, and just
jump in at any point you want to. The more we keep it moving around,
the more we can get those different opinions coming out. So, a walking
trail.
Hugh I think the same thing for all of these things. They want something that’s
going to be safe.
Dr. Hibbs Ooh, that might be a good place to start too. If we can think in
generalizations and apply it in the whole area, I think that’s an excellent
place to start.
Hugh A good place to park where their car is going to be safe, or their rack
isn’t going to be removed from the car while they’re going down the
river or riding a bike. A place when it gets dark, before they get back
they can feel safe. You know, getting back to their starting point.
Dr. Hibbs I hadn’t thought about after dark. Now the issues start to change.
Hugh There used to be a little trail down here and I’m sure there are different
perceptions at different times of the day when you walk along there.
Bob In terms of degree or issue? I’m sure a walking trail would have higher
concerns for security even around civilized, settled areas or major towns
where you are going to get more people walking shorter trips, but more
people walking alright? Yeah, security would be a major issue then, less
so down between these towns. Between Reading and Pottstown I’m sure
that, that the issue would come up, but percentage wise it wouldn’t be
there.
Dr. Hibbs I’m probably going in the totally wrong direction here, if you had safety
issues that you could put on the table for us.
Deirdre Well, I was just thinking. We have people telling us that there are parts of
the park that they don’t feel safe. The parts of the park that are not
populated. But we’ve had no assaults. Can’t think of... When I think back
over the last several years there have been absolutely nothing, and it’s not
because we’re overrun with Rangers. We only have 2 Rangers that look
over acres and acres. Fewer police type people in the park then you’d
find into town. At the same time both walkers and hikers in secluded
areas don’t want to see anybody else so it’s kind of hard to generalize.
But I’d say in addition to safety, um, people want scenery, and they don’t
want, um, they don’t want anyone else to get in their way. No matter
which one of the things they are, they don’t want to have to veer, or head
in any other direction where anybody is, is astonishing to me. The many
complaints that we hear, “I saw somebody”, or “the dog is in my way”.
We do have accidents, particularly between bikers and pedestrians. The
numbers, actually the bikers don’t use common sense.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., now we’re looking at safety as a concern
Deirdre Yeah, well in terms of assaults that’s not an issue.
Dr. Hibbs Does that say the issue would be wider trails do you think?
Deirdre Well it would…
Dr. Hibbs Well, wider is a bad way of saying it because wider and wider..
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 9Deirdre I don’t think it’s so much width because you’re studying people not
following basic safety directions. It’s really designing trails for different
places. The Schuylkill River Trail is ya know, is labeled as a walking
trail, but I think it’s very difficult to walk with the volumes of bicycles on
it.
Dr. Hibbs O.K. Would it be safe to say when we’re talking about the safety issue,
that the safety issue is probably gonna show itself. The safety issue is
probably more relevant at those places that you would, put in, ya know.
Put into the river, put into the trail.
Deirdre Yeah, in terms of cars, as he mentioned. We do get that.
Jim I would think in terms of walkers, that’s not a good statement to make.
Uh, as she’s already pointed out they asked for secluded areas on a trail,
and yet, those are the very areas where their imagination leaves to play
with them. Really you’re not dealing with an activity kind of security
issue. She’s not having problems with that, but you’re dealing with
peoples’ thoughts about what might be dangerous.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., do we have any other generalizations that may go across
categories?
Mike I think in the more urbanized areas. Say Pottstown. The trail has 2 issues
I think. I, every time the river floods, or the river comes up high on the
trail kind of. Well, I’m not real familiar with the trail, but most trails in
urban areas that seem to be used a lot for the short term trips, like you
mentioned, are usually raised up, and somehow they’re walked, uh, in
that area. That is some kind of surface that you know is like normal
cleanup. It doesn’t wash
Mike,
Continued
away every time there is a flood. Above grade, right, and things like that,
and at least in those areas that have heavy use, here in Pottstown for
example. A more permanent type of trail might be something that people
use more often for those short little hikes and things like that. Or just
walking and things like that. Outside of the urban areas I really don’t
think that’s an issue.
Jack Some park benches would be good. Some rest areas would be good.
Maybe some restrooms along the way somewhere
Dr. Hibbs I think that’s going to get into a bigger question that we want to talk
about. What types of facilities are necessary? Ah, in these areas where
people are going to be getting on the trail, and off the trail. Is that where
you’re going Jack? O.K., do we want to take these individually then?
What do you think most people are looking for in a walking trail, a
hiking trail, a jogging trail? What are some differences here? What are
some unique differences among these users?
Jack Well, on a biking trail you can go from here to Philly and back in a day.
Whereas a walker they would walk Spring City and back, and so there’s a
range factor in there. Like for me, I would have supplies to water
somewhere around Manyunk. Mike I don’t know if you know about the
pretzel stand on Lock St, he’s got one of those to fill up our bottles.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 10Dr. Hibbs That’s interesting. What we talk about most, and I’m not supposed to
inject myself in it. Because you’re not here to listen to me. But the only
reason I’m going to talk about this is by way of giving an example. Being
somewhat of a biker, which isn’t much, and having come in contact with
this project. What I see about 80% of the bikers and walkers doing, they
don’t usually get much further then about 20 or 30 minutes from where
ever they start at. You know what I’m saying? Now again we’re talking
about most. They only get to about 20 or 30 minutes from where they’re
going to, o.k. And it seems like the places that people put in the most are
the ones that have what you were talking about a minute ago Jack. The
places that have the bathrooms, that have the good parking. You know,
these types of facilities. O.K., so it would seem to me what you were
talking about a minute ago, o.k. is that when we talk about bathrooms,
when we talk about the facilities. Is that almost a given if we’re going to
be considering a spot that is going to be a place that a business is going to
be there.
Jack The places that you can use the restrooms in Philly, uh, on the bike trail,
or the place over in Valley Forge, the park facilities there, or the
Norristown train station, there’s a restroom at the top of that. Then after
that you have to hold it until you get to (CITY ?) and Lloyds Hall in
Philly. Lloyds Hall is about 16 or 17 miles.
Dr. Hibbs Do you think that impacts the traffic in that area?
Jack Yes
Dr. Hibbs O.K.
Jack It may, it may. It depends on who it is. Now around (?) you have a lot of
family activity there. That seems to dry up a mile or so outside of
Norristown. Then you get more seasoned riders going the distance then
on in. When the trail runs out down around River Road. Ya know River
Rd. where the road goes underneath the old railroad tracks? Well right
there, uh, the more seasoned riders will take the road route into
Manyunk. Whereas the novice will go down the canal footpath. That
place, well there’s really nothing going that way but Manyunk. That’s
where you start looking for facilities.
Dr. Hibbs Who’s on the trails a lot? Who here is on the trail a lot?
Vernon I would say, like Hugh said, people want to get away, other people don’t.
The people will utilize a section of the trail that they like. I don’t think it
has to be beautiful. I think it should be continuous, but I don’t think it has
to be able to be biked from Philly to here. Or be able to be hiked from
Philly to Pottsville. The people that don’t want to bike and don’t want to
ride any kind of grade are gonna go to this section of the trail.
Dr. Hibbs That brings up an interesting point. Can people self select based on their
own wants and needs, the part of the trail they want to be on.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 11Vernon Based on their own wants and needs and their ability to do it. I mean
there can be a guy out there 95, and wants to walk the trail. He’ll take a
part with less grade, and obviously there isn’t a lot of grade along the
river. It’s pretty flat most of the way, but some sections that would be
more secluded like I can think, from Hamburg to Schuylkill Haven you
go through Auburn without barely seeing Auburn. It’s that mountainous.
You’re talking 16, 18, miles and um, if you want that type of experience
on the Schuylkill River Trail, I would say that’s where to go if you don’t
want to see people. I don’t expect to see a lot of the people using the trail
there, and if they are, they’re I mean … there aren’t many people….
Dr. Hibbs Would it be fair to say Vern, that people at your Port Clinton store… I
wonder if the average person, this 80%. The person who is accessing the
trail or accessing the river at Port Clinton, is significantly different than
the person who is doing it down in Norristown? In other words, are yours
more adventurous? Or do you think that you also have the people that are
along the trail for 20 or 30 minutes, and turn around and come back.
Vernon Yes, I would say it’s the same people, they just didn’t have a chance to
drive north, I would think.
Dr. Hibbs So, would you agree that the frequent users are probably these people
who stay on the trail 20 or 30 minutes and then come back the other way?
Vernon I don’t know about 20 or 30 minutes. I have people that come into my
store that go to the Pinnacle. I mean that come in to see me are not up
there for 20 or 30 minutes.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., that’s what I was looking at. And what do you think the average is
for those people?
Vernon 3 to 6 Hours
Dr. Hibbs So, it’s a destination. They’re going there for the day.
Vernon Yeah
Dr. Hibbs Gotcha, that’s interesting.
Wayne The Schuylkill Trail up there is (?). It corners there, and people can use
it. I did. Some people cannot bike it, ah, not many.
Dr. Hibbs So we’re self-selecting more adventurous.
Wayne There’s an intersection near the Appalachian Trail and the Schuylkill
Trail underneath there at Port Clinton, and once the trail is developed I
think you’ll see a lot more 20, or 30 types, half the day.
Vernon Yeah, once they know about it, now they don’t.
Wayne They take a Sunday walk from Auburn to Hamburg.
Vernon People come in my store asking where the towpath is, all kinds of people.
Dr. Hibbs I often wonder because we’re talking about a site that suits them best. I
wonder how many people access a path, and because there isn’t the right
signage for the paths. I’ll give you an example. Because there isn’t the
right signage for the path, they have a negative experience, and don’t go
back. For example, if we were talking about, ah, ah, ah…
Vernon Spring Mountain?
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 12Dr. Hibbs Spring Mountain. If you make a left, o.k. Well if I go up that one my
thighs are burning. If you go to the right, it’s flat as a pancake. So I
wondered if information comes into play here, and communicating that
information to people, so that when they go and have that initial
experience, that it makes sense to them. To encourage people to use these
trails, which may be getting off here a little bit.
All General Hubbub
Bryan I was kind of in agreement here as to where you were going, where you
are heading as far as different types of people, different sections of the
trail. Like Spring Mountain is really flat going to Green Lake, and people
who don’t even normally go out and have outdoor activity will go to
walk that trail, and have a great time. They talk about it and have a good
experience. Whereas, if some one is serious about hiking or somethin’,
it’s just kind of boring cause it’s an easy flat trail. For them it’s like,
walkin’ down Main St. or something. So different types of people, and
actually if you’re talking about a walkin’ trail, a lot of people walk their
dogs..maybe 80% of walkers on Spring Mountain walk their dogs.
Dr. Hibbs Wow, that’s interesting. Percentages are that high?
Bryan It is high.
Dr. Hibbs 80%?
Bryan It’s surprising and they cater to that with little doggie bags. People
appreciate that I think. But, um, it is high. A lot of people walk their
dogs, um, maybe it’s a suburban section of the trail used by suburbanites.
Dr. Hibbs Does anyone feel that I brought up a legitimate point? I have a problem
with people saying, “Go to somewhere else”. That communicating what
each section of the trail is about character-wise can create a better
atmosphere, can create a better first time experience for the trail. And get
people to use it more often.
Deirdre We did a meeting in October regarding the trails, regarding the
connections to the counties trails, and that’s the one thing we heard really
overwhelmingly. That people wanted information, they didn’t necessarily
want a million signs. They wanted updated guides and some indication as
to where they were, and how far to the next point. What was the name of
the trail, and what were the basic services.
Dr. Hibbs Did the terrain ever come up in that Deirdre? Did terrain ever come up?
Deirdre No
Dr. Hibbs They just wanted to get oriented to the place that…
Deirdre The park is very hilly. But I just wanted to say that the other
overwhelming thing was people want loops.
Dr. Hibbs Loops?
Deirdre Loops. Cause people don’t really want to turn around and see the same
thing from the other direction.
Dr. Hibbs That’s interesting.
All General hubbub
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 13Dr. Hibbs O.k., so what I’m hearing is that they’re more interested in locating
themselves, then they are to the next access point, or what the terrain is
like.
Deirdre They want to know the history of the park, what happened here. What is
this building that is interesting but there’s nothing to tell me about it.
Dr. Hibbs O.K. We haven’t heard much about the river here.
Jack One thing that was said about signs. One thing that would help is like, the
trails that are coming into the community. Like where the trail comes into
Pottstown. Put a map of downtown Pottstown, where the McDonalds is,
where the hospital is, where the drugstore is, where you can get to it.
Dr. Hibbs We all want to be in the middle of nowhere, right next to somewhere.
Jack As soon as they can get into town, they can see where that stuff is, and
how to get to it.
Dr. Hibbs Interesting. And you think that would be a way to connect with it?
Jack Yes, just one map. Like “Welcome to Pottstown”, and a map of
downtown Pottstown that would list the businesses. Just think of the
advertising that could go on that sign.
Mike And historic sites, and things like that.
Jack Like Pottstown Manor
Mike Yeah, like Pottstown Manor, right.
Dr. Hibbs So we almost have to discern what people are looking for.
Jack Well if I was coming into Pottstown from Philly, and I was looking to get
some snack foods and Gatorade.
Dr. Hibbs Sure, sure. Where are the river people? Any comments on this stuff?
Bob Well at this point I wanted to make a comment. I think you would need to
be very careful of signage. That annoys people who are outdoor people.
Ah, I am thinking, I am thinking that you’re on the right track. I’m
thinking rather than signage the hardware stuck along the trail
somewhere, that perhaps pamphlets might work. And I know all the
problems with pamphlets, alright. But uh, they are somewhat less
obtrusive then the hard signage, and they may work out better. I think
that people want to know where these points of interest are. Where I
could go to the rest facilities, where I could get something to eat, that sort
of thing. The other side of it is, a sign, a hard sign, a big thing is going to
bother them, alright.
Jack It doesn’t have to be that big. On the Perkiomen Trail there’s signs for
the entire trail, like you are here, or something on that order. It doesn’t
have to be that big.
Vernon Put a sign at the trailhead. How many miles you’ve come, etc.
Jack Welcome to Pottstown. Here’s where you get food, etc.
Vernon On the Appalachian Trail they have a book called the “Through Hikers
Companion”. In the book it tells you every towns’ services from Georgia
to Maine. What’s in every town. Where the food is, where the lodging is,
where the grocery is, where the laundromat is, where the soda machine
is, where you can sleep. Everything for every town.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 14Dr. Hibbs Jim I saw you shaking your head a while ago. Do you want to chime in?
Jim I just had some thoughts on having a map of the river, the Greenways
Map. It lists all the access points and facilities, that sort of thing. Which
is great. Signs along the river I don’t think would be much good.
Dr. Hibbs Which is different than the signs on the trailhead, am I understanding that
correctly?
Aaron The dams might be where we have safety issues, and danger spots. There
are going to be people that are the novice. Canoers and kayakers, and
they have no clue what’s beyond the other side of the horizon line, and
unfortunately a few have gone over. For
Aaron,
Continued
safety we should have signs. Another thought I had, is where you have
“put ins”, and “take outs”. Boaters like to change clothing, and that might
be something to take into account. Um, planning those areas.
Dr. Hibbs Facilities. So it’s not just a bathroom you’re saying. A place where
someone can change.
Bob And generally speaking this wouldn’t have to be a facility that would
accommodate 50 people, usually canoeing groups. Well if you have 12 to
15 people you have a large group. So something like that. That would
accommodate that amount of people would be ideal. Because he’s right,
we do change.
Dr. Hibbs Kind of reminds me of the Blue Marsh Lake, the bathrooms there are big
enough to change in, but nothing tells you, you should change there. If
that makes any sense. In other words, yeah, go ahead and do it, but we’re
not going to put a sign out saying come change here.
Aaron In some areas where you have residents near a “put in”, you can
understand that they don’t want some guy running around in his
underwear.
Bob It’s my experience that you can be on a road that hasn’t been used in 15
yrs., you drop your drawers and here comes a bus of old ladies. Happens
every time.
Dr. Hibbs O.K. Anyone else want to chime in? O.K., now we’re going from the
general to the more specific here. What I’m looking to try to do here is, is
to try to, for a better lack of putting it, ah, segment what we did over
here. In other words when we talk about a walking trail, do we see people
with different characteristics and can we break that up into 2 or 3 groups,
or however many logical groups there should be. Are there needs that are
significantly different? I think I put the example up here, and this was
totally out of my head, o.k. For example people that bike who might be
put into 3 different categories; 1. Family Fun Riders. These people get
out when they can, and usually ride where it’s most convenient. 2. Week
End Adventurers; People who get out every week and look for some
variety in where they bike. 3. Active Bikers; People that have made
biking a part of their lifestyle. These folks set distance goals, may join a
biking club, and “live to ride”. Terrain is not an issue when choosing a
ride. So, that’s kind of what I was looking for in describing the different
users of the Heritage Area. Is to try and break it down even further.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 15Bob I would think your walking trail.
Dr. Hibbs O.K.
Bob You would have different groups. You would have those people 20, 30
minutes. They are also the ones who want loops. You also have the hiker
that is walking, not the Appalachian Trail kind of hiker, but someone
who wants to go out for a longer walk.
Bob,
Continued
Spending ¾ of the day walking. They are not going to want so many of
the loops, as they are some facilities to use on the trail. Depending on
how long it is. It may be just the trailhead. But if they walk for any length
of time, yes, they have different needs than those people who only go out
for 20 or 30 minutes. Ah, 20 or 30 minutes, yes, they will want the loops.
I walk this way and I’ll turn around and go back. I wanna go around and
see everything new and wind up right where I started.
Dr. Hibbs Leave it to me to be gross. I think of where I’m at, I am pretty much a
weekend person. I’m at this enough to know that I need to put toilet
paper in the backpack. You know what I mean? We don’t need the
hassle, you know what I’m saying, and that’s an indication right there
you know, that I’m one of the people that are going beyond the safety of
a rest stop being 20 minutes away. You know what I’m saying? And I’m
taking care of myself, kind of along the way. Um so we have identified 2
groups of people that would be walking the trail. These are people again,
categorize it again Bob.
Bob There are people who walk for 20 or 30 minutes, and they’re dead. They
want the loops. Things where they could see something new all the time,
and end up right back where they started. Versus those who go out for the
afternoon or ¾ of the day. They may start out at 8 or 9 in the morning,
and get done at 2 or 3. That’s fine, they love to walk, walk, walk. They’re
going to need rest facilities. Things like that at strategic locations, but
they don’t want the loops, and the trails. That’s not something they’re
looking for.
Dr. Hibbs Tom do you also think that they are also people who are kind of like the
Week End Adventurers, they are looking or doing different trails in
different places, on different days.
Bob These are what I would call serious walkers. Versus those who, uh, just
go for a walk.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., Jack.
Jack Let’s get ready for the riders.
Dr. Hibbs I think we’re done there for a bit, then we’ll come back to that.
Bryan These are people that use it like a gym. Whereas like every 3 days I do
my 10 miles and come back. They use it that way. You see them all the
time.
Dr. Hibbs Do we see any needs that lead to purchase opportunities here? Talking
about these 3 groups. Do we see any needs among these 3 groups that
might lend themselves to purchase opportunities, or selling opportunities
depending on what side of the cash register you’re on.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 16Jim There’s a stretch of trail along the Tulpehawken Creek that gets really
heavy with hikers, bikers, and joggers. People use it for an exercise area,
other people who are out for a casual walk in the afternoon.
Dr. Hibbs So it’s a good cross section of everybody?
Jim On the weekend it’s jammed. It’s just a pleasant stretch that goes right
along the creek. The scenery is nice. The trail is well maintained. There
have been a few minor incidents, but generally it’s pretty safe. That gets
a lot of use, and because it’s a park area there isn’t much in the way of
facilities. I think there are some food concessions.
Bob Ah, there is out at…
Jim The bridge?
Bob Yeah, the bridge.
Dr. Hibbs Have businesses come and gone there, or just no one came in?
Bob I think the county pretty much controls it.
Jim Yeah, it’s all a county park, and so all the businesses are pretty much run
by the county, or at least controlled by the county. I think that kind of
place would have more business opportunities, particularly with the food
sales.
Dr. Hibbs Do you think that food is probably the number one opportunity along
these trails?
Jim The trail that gets that kind of use gets the kind of people that are gonna
stop and buy.
Bob Ice cream and hot dogs.
Dr. Hibbs Do they have the bike rentals or the surrey rentals, canoe rentals, and
kayak rentals?
Jim & Bob No
Dr. Hibbs Is that because it’s the county?
Jim I don’t know.
Bob I don’t think anyone has ever looked into it seriously.
Dr. Hibbs Alright. Where are we going next? Jack.
Jack For the biking there. Again in all 3 of those categories, um, the Family
Fun Riders, you’re range is gonna be somewhere between 5 and 10 miles,
depending on the skill level of the family. And when they get done, one
of the kids is gonna be hungry. Those guys want to drive to this spot with
bikes on the car and park it and go, come back, and then hit the nearest
McDonalds. The Week End Adventurers, they may or may not ride from
their house. So they will get off their bike for the restroom. They are also
going to be interested in where they can take breaks along the way. The
Active Bikers, they are going to have their route planned out. They will
probably ride to the trail, and continue on from there. Their planned
destinations are gonna be where they take their breaks and spend their
money. They turn around and come back. So they are going to be looking
for a place where they can take their bike. For example in town here, they
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 17Jack,
Continued
just built Borough Hall. They put bike racks out, but I don’t want to use
one of their racks. I’ll chain my bike to a tree before I use one of their
racks because of the way they’re set up. Where as down in Center City,
I’ll use the hoops and chain it up to that, more secure. McDonalds up
here on East End, there’s no provision for a bike, and I’ll just chain it to
their bike hold. The Week End Adventurer and Active Bikers are looking
for something like that. Where as the family, if they’re going to be on the
trail, as soon as the kids are tired they’re going to turn around and come
back.
Dr. Hibbs Bryan, I was thinking about you a second ago. I was thinking about you
in the context of, in the rentals that you have done. You’re in a unique
situation because you just opened up. Are those people deciding to ride
these bikes as an impulse when they get to the trail or have they already
heard about you and are seeking you out?
Bryan At the shore they say it’s impulse buys. The people at the shore, or if you
talk to somebody who’s trying to sell you a franchise, they’ll say it’s
impulse.
Dr. Hibbs They don’t know that they’re getting in that thing till they get there.
Bryan Till they walk out, see it, and say, “Oh that looks like fun, let’s try it.”
But I say it’s a 50/50 thing maybe.
Dr. Hibbs So it’s already 50/50?
Bryan Yeah, it depends on the customers, too. Some have ridden 5 or 6 times,
yeah, so I don’t know.
Dr. Hibbs And how long have you been in business there?
Bryan 3 months
Dr. Hibbs 3 months?
Bryan Yeah
Dr. Hibbs Have you seen, in 3 months… I recognize it’s a short period of time. But
if you’re already getting a lot…. A natural question comes up. If you are
already getting people who are seeking you out, plus you’re getting the
impulse riders, o.k. Is your business already growing, you see a trend
going on?
Bryan Yeah, the weather, and when school started it dropped off. Fortunately, I
got some coverage in newspapers. That really helped a lot. People talked
about that a lot this summer.
Dr. Hibbs So the people that were coming up to you had mentioned…
Bryan Yeah, that they read the article about me in the paper. Stuff like that.
Dr. Hibbs So, you can’t attribute it to, uh, the business is already naturally growing
from people who have already experienced it, plus the impulse buyers.
Bryan Yeah
Dr. Hibbs O.K., that’s fine.
Mike Getting back to the Week End Adventurers. Some of them will ride bikes
to the trailhead, for example, Metropolis Bike Shop in Manyunk each
Saturday, they would bring out a bunch of bikes because it’s an excellent
location, right next to the trail. That’s one place for everyone to go….
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 18Dr. Hibbs Yeah, I wondered if someone set up a bike rental place. If there were
opportunities there. You could go to the scouts. We could rent 10 bikes a
day for whatever we’ll pay an hour. Or church groups, that kind of thing.
Cause that’s what you just said isn’t it Jack?
Jack Metropolis Bike. Someone from out of town wanting to ride the trail for a
day. They go there and rent out bikes for the day. The bikes they rent are
high quality bikes. That’s why they can command a higher price.
Bryan About bike rentals. I wonder if it’s like a thing of the past, just because
bike prices have dropped so much. You can go to Wal-Mart, and buy one
for 75 bucks. There’s a little difference as far as bike rentals.
Jack That’s just depends on the bike it is. The bikes you get over at Wal-Mart
are not that comfortable. You can spend a couple of extra dollars for a
bike that fits you.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., do we want to take a look at this list, and try to bring out other
categories here. Canoeing, kayaking people?
Aaron You could make the same sort of comparison as with the other
categories. You have the white water boaters who maybe just want to go
to a spot and play. Maybe a surf wave. Other boaters who want to go
down stream, whatever distance. Something similar could be done with
those.
Dr. Hibbs So, in an area again. I think I’ve asked this already, where do you think
there is more opportunity as far as the business goes?
Aaron Well, the biggest opportunity is probably to rent kayaks, or canoes.
Dr. Hibbs Which are going to be these people…
Aaron More or less, yeah. They don’t require as much skill to go out and use
them.
Bryan I don’t know if there’s a lodging possibility like the Baxter State Park in
Maine. They have a hotel for hikers. They have a shelter, showers. And
something that, since the trail’s long enough now, that they could stay
overnight and shower for 20 bucks, or something like that. Like a bed
and breakfast.
Kurt We’re planning to do a survey of bed and breakfasts’ in 5 counties, and
maybe publish a guide or a pamphlet to attract visitor groups.
Vernon I think people that hike the trail are going to stay in them. I don’t think
people are going to break down, and spend 75 bucks a night.
Bob Help me out here. My thought is that you have white water boaters, you
have moving water boats, day trippers, and you have play boaters.
Doesn’t matter so much as what kind boat, as much as what they’re into
to.
Aaron Those are definitely categories I agree with, but I think that in this
circumstance, on the Schuylkill there isn’t any tough white, there’s some
mild white water, and potential for some play spots, but it’s certainly not
a hot white water trip.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 19Dr. Hibbs Which gets into an interesting question. Do you think that this trail, even
if it were full blown, would the trail and river ever attract much more
then the people in the surrounding counties? I don’t mean that as a
leading question, it was asked almost as a leading question. It was
unintentional.
Aaron I would not imagine it as a major destination for boaters coming from far
away, no. But other urban areas that are a little further away, it might be
appealing.
Dr. Hibbs Such as?
Aaron Uh, the New York area, or the Philadelphia urban area.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., for this discussion, though Philly is a part of….
Aaron O.K., I doubt that you would see people from far away planning their
vacation.
Dr. Hibbs What percentage of people outside of the counties that the river runs
through that you would think would visit us even if it were a full blown
attraction.
Aaron What percentage of users outside those counties?
Dr. Hibbs Yeah
Aaron Pretty small average.
Dr. Hibbs As in?
Aaron As in less than 10 percent.
Doc Ogden Is that reason because they don’t promote, or is that because this area
hasn’t been promoted, no one knows about it.
All Yeah, that’s right
Dr. Hibbs People with experience though, that have been to different areas. Will
this area ever measure up in physical attributes to other areas?
Bob Yes, it will not measure up to the Salmon River, and places like that. But
having been involved with Sojourn since its inception, I think if it were
promoted, alright, we could draw in one or two outfitters, guided trips
down the river. There’s an awful lot of history here. The river can be
very…
Dr. Hibbs One moment. You said; “draw in one or two outfitters”. I’m not sure
what that means. I want to make sure. Is it like someone in another state
who organizes a trip to come here?
Bob More along the lines of someone here on the river who is reaching out,
drawing people in from outside the area.
Jim Like guided trips.
Dr. Hibbs O.K. So, I’m outside, I’m not in my league. But, and this is common in
other areas which leads me to believe that the physical attributes of this
wouldn’t lend itself to doing the same thing. It’s more of like a regional
destination then, being something in South Eastern, PA, not just the
counties along the river.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 20Bob Not to sound like Kurt’s publicity man, but we do have a great facility.
We have great resources. It’s been a lot of fun, and having worked with
the people on the Sojourn, the guests. I was really impressed with their
joy at seeing the river, and hearing about the river, and being on the river.
We have taken people of all levels down that river, and told the history as
we go by. We stopped at night and had programs dealing with the local
area, and told the history. Anything about that area. And they go home
and come back for a second or third year. And having done it before, I
always thought one trip down this river was enough. Ah, apparently it’s
not. Apparently these people do enjoy the river.
Kurt Something I should think they should know, that is going through my
mind. We’ve run the Sojourn for 5 years, and I think that you mentioned
10%, from outside the area. Because we have people from Mass.,
Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and they’ve read about this or heard about
it from somewhere. We should probably get you those numbers from the
last 5 years, and people from out of state can be interested in answering a
survey. Why they come here. How they learned about it. It might be a
small number, but they come here for a different experience.
Dr. Hibbs The only thing I’m thinking about, Kurt, is with numbers that small it’s
hard to effectively appeal to them in a cost efficient manor. Jim?
Doc Ogden It would be something you’d want to look at later on. Because if you’re
going to do some primary research with those people. Not only are you
going to have to expand the market, we have to identify that easily.
Typically with tourism it’s exactly what you guys are saying, it’s word of
mouth build up. Then all of a sudden a promotional splash you get people
in with.
Kurt So it doesn’t do anything for you then?
Doc Ogden No, actually it probably does do something for you. But at this point and
time with time restraints, etc., etc., etc., you’re gonna need to draw a
fairly large sample to get an accurate picture. So you’re going to need to
talk to thousands of people, if you want to get an accurate picture. 2000
people maybe to get an accurate picture of some of the regions that
you’re looking to assess. But what will give us a good hint is your telling
us they’re coming from Maryland, from Virginia wherever. Do they
come back? How many repeat customers? That would be really good
data. And the states they’re coming from will help regionalize the
drawing areas. Roger, can we move on and talk about businesses, cause
they were kind of segueing into that, and what type of businesses might
best suit the needs of these individuals. I don’t want to interrupt, but I
want to make sure we get that piece in.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 21Dr. Hibbs O.K., we have 2 minutes left on this because I think I…This one here I’m
asking, what group do you think the Schuylkill Area will attract, and
why? Do you think there’s anything unique to this area that points to one
of these groups over another? Now again, this is so general because we
haven’t told where there’s a “put in” at, what kind of facilities so this is
very vague. But is there anything unique about this area that you feel is
going to attract one group more than another?
Mike One thing I can think of is that it’s in our own back yard. It’s got so many
communities around it. That’s where I see most of the usage, in the
surrounding communities, more then people coming from outside the
area. You don’t have to look to far when you look at the Delaware River,
and you look at the activities at that one facility – Point Pleasant Canoe.
Dr. Hibbs I’m sorry to interrupt, but, yeah 2 minutes. Does one of those jump out
of your mind that this area is going to uniquely speak to? I didn’t mean to
interrupt you. Does anyone think that there is one area that this area is
uniquely more appealing to?
Bryan I think there’s one you’re missing, and that’s the historical aspect of it. If
you put a story there for them about the river. Basically it was throughout
the whole Industrial Revolution.
Dr. Hibbs Oh yeah. The story is already there, it’s just a matter of getting it out.
Bryan You say this is that lock, or this is this lock. Put a picture or a piece of
glass over the top of it, whatever. I don’t know but that’s something that
you’re totally missing.
Dr. Hibbs What’s interesting about that Bryan is... I’ll get off it quick Jim, I
promise. Aren’t those people going to fall into the family…
Vernon Family Fun Riders?
Dr. Hibbs These are going to be the J.V. people. Because they’re really here for, if I
understand what you’re saying. They’re really here for the history that
happens to co-inside with a walk.
Vernon Right.
Dr. Hibbs O.K.
Bryan One of these should be people from this area that have people coming in
from outside the area, and they want to show off something in this area.
So they take them out. So they might never have walked the trail
themselves, but when their Aunt Betty comes in, they might take her for
a walk.
Vernon Right, anybody can walk it.
Dr. Hibbs Can we talk about what kind of businesses might work in this area?
Again thinking back to different uses of the trail.
Doc Ogden Roger, can I preface this before we start talking about this for a second?
Remember along this Schuylkill River Trail there is a new business
called Cabela’s that was building up near Reading. That is going to be the
number one tourist draw in the East. They are
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 22Doc Ogden,
Continued
going to have about 12 million visitors there a year. It will get more
visitors than Independence Hall, or the Liberty Bell. Having said that,
you have the outdoor sporting equipment there. You will see a huge
growth in lodging. It’s followed every Cabela’s it’s built. You will have
growth in restaurants. In fact you will have substantial growth. It will
amaze you. There will be 3 hotels around there within probably 2 years,
around Cabela’s. It will amaze you. It’s a magnet, and it’s going to
happen. It happened in Monroe, Michigan. If you look at that site. The
build up of Monroe, which was pretty much not near anything. All of a
sudden you have every motel chain. You probably have 22 restaurants
near there. You have your fishing. You have your hunting. They’ve got
all sorts of new stuff coming up. So, keeping that in mind as we talk
about businesses. That you’re going to see a huge influx of people
coming in. By the way, Valley Forge is going to see quite a few of those
people. Can we sneak away some of those people? Or are there some
businesses that will compliment that business. As we talk about trying to
satisfy the needs of the current consumer there, I think we’re going to see
some new types of tourists coming into the area. In fact, I’m 100% sure
of it. But can we compliment with Cabela’s? Because it’s there we don’t
want to fight it. Are there businesses that we can put in to compliment it
quite well. So, keep that in the back of your mind as we discuss what
attracts business to the area. That the area are attracting, restroom
facilities to the area, or whatever we’re trying to attract to the area.
Vernon If anyone has a half a million dollars. I’ll build a (?) outside of Cabela’s,
and I’ll put maps out for the trail there.
Dr. Hibbs You’re saying that jokingly?
Vernon Well ya know if people (?) parking lot, that would be a great spot, ya
know.
Dr. Hibbs In a couple of minutes I’m gonna ask if there’s one place to be, where
would it be? I’m gonna ask if there is one place…
Vernon Are you talking about the river, or are you talking about Cabela’s.
Doc Ogden You could go away from Cabela’s. You can look at the whole trail, and
try to figure out where to locate the business and figure out what type of
businesses.
Vernon Port Clinton would be a good spot.
Doc Ogden Yeah exactly! Or you can talk about Cabela’s and what’s around
Cabela’s. What kind of business would be needed by the groups coming
in? The segments you guys are telling us about, there are significant
segments here. So if we know these segments are coming in, and you
have the Family Fun Rider, the Week End Adventurer, the Active Biker.
We know these segments are coming in. What kind of businesses are
they going to look at? Keeping in mind that you probably don’t want
unless you’re really, really crazy want to compete with Cabela’s.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 23Dr. Hibbs Yeah, you need to compliment.
Doc Ogden You need to compliment. You need to do that with the same product, but
you’d have to market it differently. But what kind of businesses could
come in there, and where should they locate? Perhaps along the trail.
Vernon This is what I saw for Port Clinton before Cabela’s was there. To me Port
Clinton is Jim Thorpe, but there isn’t the business there. Now one thing
that Jim Thorpe has that Port Clinton doe not have, is that they have an
ordinance that no chain store can open within a 20 mile radius there. Now
obviously that’s not possible for that to happen now, but there has to be
some type…If you’re talking about small retailers, they have to have
some type of protection in order to stay in business. Now I don’t know,
maybe that’s…
Doc Ogden Are you talking about small retailers, or are we talking about attracting
larger retailers? What would be comfortable for these segments? Would
they rather go to a café? Would they rather go to Bennigans? I mean,
would that work? What type of business?
Vernon Well if you look around here, there’s nobody here for Bennigans.
Doc Ogden No, but one person mentioned McDonalds.
Vernon Yeah, they mentioned McDonalds, right.
Doc Ogden Right, well they have McDonalds Cafes coming up, and Starbucks. Do
you want something like that? Arby’s people, yuppies. Are the Family
Fun Riders yuppies? Would they want a Starbucks?
Vernon I don’t know….
Doc Ogden I’m not trying to be…
Vernon Don’t try to put ‘em in Port Clinton.
Mike There’s a place close around Philadelphia where they’ll take an organized
ride, just to go to Starbucks. Or someplace for bagels, just to have an end
destination.
Dr. Hibbs Let’s try to see what best suits the needs of these groups in general, and
each of these groups we’ve just discussed. So, someone tell me what they
can envision somewhere along here. And what the question is gonna be
coming up is; Can you think of a particular place, that’s ideally suited?
Now you might say, well, this is our job, and this is where the job begins,
in asking you folks your opinion. Let’s start with what best fits the needs
of these groups.
Hugh If we’re talking about somebody trying to rent bicycles, or renting
canoes, kayaks, things like that. I think that you almost have to have a
business that someone has already established. Some place pretty close to
the river. It’s sort of like not giving up your day job, ya know? Because
you’re not going to be able to start up and actually stay in business
effectively, I don’t think. Unless there’s a tremendous surge in interest,
and business. Because you have a lot of expenses to start with. And it
would seem to me that an existing business that is already on the river, or
close to the river, could go on as a side line, and that would give you your
greatest chance of success.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 24Bob ...it is all on the river.
Hugh But there are other places. I mean if you’re talking about food, etc. There
are other places. People who are very close to the river at present, and
you could manage it. I mean you don’t have to be right on the river. I
mean if you look at the places like Jay Pooles on the Brandywine, he’s
done well. But you’ve got to remember Jay was a school teacher for
many years, and he could…He has a very economic location, behind a
parking lot, etc. And he has wild signs to get people in there. Basically he
has the whole Brandywine river at his disposal, to use for rental at no
cost.
Dr. Hibbs Hugh, where I’m going with this one. When I think about it, I can’t
remember the name of it. Pt. Pleasant, wherever it is. When you think
about this location you could get much worse. Would you agree with that
Mike?
Mike Yeah, well you could get worse, but it’s not…
Dr. Hibbs I don’t think you could get much worse. It’s off the beaten path, o.k.
Where he “puts in” at is very awkward and bad access o.k. When I take a
look at it Bryan, the only attribute I see that falls into where he’s at is,
there’s a parking lot somewhere that allows him to park there, o.k. If you
think of some of these canoe places. What I’m trying to say is there’s an
opportunity here, o.k. to pick a sight, and possibly, possibly, o.k.
Integrate a lot of the relevant attributes that are needed, and bring them
all to one spot. Because when I think of Pt. Pleasant the only thing that he
did was to recognize an unmet need. He didn’t do a site selection study.
Ya know what I’m saying? He didn’t look at, where’s my visibility. He
didn’t look at where are the bathrooms at.
Bob I would tell you the first thing you need to do is look at the size of the
business, alright. And I don’t think the Schuylkill Heritage Corridor will
ever support huge businesses. You’ll never have a Kittanning canoe on
the Schuylkill. You will have…
Dr. Hibbs Where is that at?
Bob Kittanning is on the Delaware. Their base is near Marshall’s Creek.
Where I’m going with this is they have landings all the way down.
Dr. Hibbs That’s what I’m getting at here. And if you think about it, we have one
thing here that they don’t have. Tons of people. Tons of people. You
don’t have to get in a car and drive there. Now, think about it. If they’re
willing to go there, how many more people would be willing to go 20
minutes, instead of 2 hours. So, what I’m trying to say is, if the location
could integrate, o.k. what the bikers are looking for, a place to put in the
boats, a place to put in the tubes, o.k. A place for hikers with the
facilities. It becomes planned as far as, o.k. this is the major spot. They
can put it in upstream, they could also put it downstream, and the
facilities are there to suit. I think there’s a synergy
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 25Dr. Hibbs,
Continued
there for bringing a lot of different elements together in one location.
That says if a guy can make it on the Delaware, who has a location you
couldn’t trip on if you wanted to. That Pt. Pleasant canoe place. You
couldn’t trip on it if you wanted too, o.k. And yet it’s successful by
every, oh I don’t know. What would happen if he had a location, and
facilities, and access to a larger population? You see what I’m saying?
And that’s where the opportunity is I think. But that’s me talking, you’re
not here to listen to me. I’m supposed to be listening to you.
Bob You’re going to run into a need for a lot of niche businesses. You’re
walking on a hiking trail. Ah, ice cream store, sodas. You don’t need a
full-blown restaurant. Snacks, that kind of thing. As far as canoeing, and
kayaking. I think that there has to be a base and then it’s up to that person
running the business how far he wants his boats and bikes to be out of
sight. And where they ”put in” and “take out”, rest places, and things like
that. That’s going to have to be worked out based upon where he wants.
Bob,
Continued
He or she. But I think they are all going to be smaller businesses. They
are not going to be the size of the Kittanning Canoe and if that’s what
you’re envisioning, I don’t think it’s going to happen.
Vernon They can support a small family maybe. Maybe your horse is before the
cart right now. As it becomes more well known, it’s possible. The higher
numbers blow me away. 1.6 million? It seems to me it would be a no
brainer. If you’re looking for a place to put a business, and they want
someone to put a business there. Have at it. Where do you want it?
Deirdre I also want to mention that we’re building a museum of American
Revolution. We’re expecting another 700 hundred thousand. The
Audubon Society right across the road in Mill Grove has become a major
Audubon Park on the site, the first in America. They haven’t given us a
projection. That’s right at the extension of the park by the Perkiomen
Trail, and the Schuylkill River Trail. We know there’s potential for a Bed
& Breakfast in that area. Now there’s nothing. It’s amazing to me that
there’s nothing. No decent Bed & Breakfast anywhere.
Dr. Hibbs Did I hear in casual conversation with other people here that it’s possible
that Valley Forge is looking to do this, or invite someone in to do it?
Deirdre We’re not in the business of running businesses. We have concessions we
are wanting to fill. We would be looking for professionals to come in
and…..
Doc Ogden They would be like a leased department, or area operations.
Deirdre Yes
Doc Ogden What type of businesses would you be looking for?
Deirdre What we think would be successful is a Bed and Breakfast. We do think
it would be a big opportunity for a Bed and Breakfast. And again, it
would be trail related, thing might happen. We do have a number of
things on the trail, including food service. My sense of bike rentals is that
they won’t work because I think everyone has one. Maybe we’ll get some
out of towners. They may or may not take the bike. It may work.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 26Doc Ogden Let me throw another cog in. Have you seen the back of this building?
What if there were 4,5, or 6 people sitting around a table out there
somewhere. They wanted to make sure they were servicing all these
groups. So one of them did bike rentals. One did canoe rentals. One of
them did whatever. You put in a location like the back of this building,
all your 6. Now you’ve reduced the cost to 1/6 of what it would have cost
you to operate that business. Maybe somebody has food service back
there. Maybe allow someone a Bed & Breakfast. There’s some kind of
connection back there.
Dr. Hibbs Like Jim was saying 4 or 5 different small businesses.
Doc Ogden Like a flea market for tourism.
Dr. Hibbs That way there’s all kind of shared costs to bring the overhead down.
Which brings the breakeven point down. Which may make it more
survivable.
Doc Ogden I’m just throwing that in to get your opinion on it. I’m not saying this is a
good idea.
Vernon I think everyone of us should exchange phone numbers, and pinkie
swear, and say we’re going to do something about this.
Dr. Hibbs Exactly, like neighbor to neighbor. If you go to a Sports Authority, and
it’s not, it’s Longhorn Ski and Sport in there with skis, and concessions. I
don’t know if that’s the only one that’s there. That’s the same type thing
as talking about possibilities here.
Wayne I think like the people who own this building. The first couple of years
they could give the concessions breaks on rent, and whatever. They could
help them with the building of the business. There are programs that
many communities have and they should be able to tap into that.
Dr. Hibbs So it can help them get over their first year, second year. Who did I ask if
they were out of the woods yet? Was it you Vernon?
Vernon Yeah
Dr. Hibbs And you said how long now?
Vernon 3 years.
Dr. Hibbs 3 years, and you’re still scared? For lack of a better term.
Vernon Sure, absolutely.
Dr. Hibbs Any discussion you want to have on this? I thought we’d go a little
further than this one.
Bryan Is marketing a big issue for you? I mean as far as expense in this type of
business. You just can’t get the word out there. You can’t get people to
know about you. They don’t know what they’re missing..
Vernon Yeah.
Bryan Is there any organization that you could tap into and connect with?
Dr. Hibbs See that’s what’s interesting too. What Jim was saying a minute ago, if
you have 5 concessions together, you only need one ad.
Vernon There are people who don’t know about it, and there are people I could
be talkin’ with. I could be talkin’ to Aaron here. I could be talkin’ to Jim.
But then, you know, how much time do you spend?
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 27Aaron Well one way is a promotion ad. You should consider this. Newsletters,
and other opportunities for pretty inexpensive advertising can reach the
real target audience.
Hugh There are people that want to rent. We get calls all the time. We just refer
all of them to the closest place. We get calls all the time. I just try to turn
um around, and sell um a thing.
Vernon What I do in my rental is that if they buy, I’ll give um ½ off their rental
back.
Hugh You always want to have some sort of a deal for people. Everyone
expects a deal today.
Dr. Hibbs Here’s something I think was hinted at earlier in this question. Does an
outfitter, a bike rental place, even need to be next to a river?
Bob No, but I think you’re using the river to draw people together
Dr. Hibbs You say it stands a better chance of success?
Bob Sure
Dr. Hibbs Again, that seems like, duh.
Bob Now, if you take the one in Jim Thorpe. He’s not on the trail. He’s
probably what, 3 miles from the trail.
Dr. Hibbs As soon as you come into Jim Thorpe, he’s right there. But you see what
I’m saying , it’s not on the trail
Vernon There are other things to look at in Jim Thorpe on the bike, you don’t
necessarily….
Dr. Hibbs Is there? You can’t ride a bike…Can you really ride a bike around Jim
Thorpe?
Vernon Sure
Dr. Hibbs Well it doesn’t seem very user friendly to me.
Vernon Well no, it’s not user friendly. But what I’m saying if you wanted to do
that…
Dr. Hibbs What I’m saying is I don’t think any one is going to Jim Thorpe to ride
around town.
Aaron No they would ride the shuttle.
Dr. Hibbs That goes back to what I was saying earlier. There’s a company making
money where it has a positive attribute of being in a borough. You know
what I’m saying? It has a positive attribute of being in the borough, has a
positive attribute of all the parking at the railroad station. But yet they
have added expense of trucking people all over the place. Because I think
its Schuylkill Haven. 23 miles they take them.
All White Haven
Dr. Hibbs Excuse me, White Haven.
Aaron There are some of the wilderness on the river where you don’t have
businesses built.
Mike There are 2 types of rentals too. In the boat rentals. Well like you, are you
right on the river itself where you are now?
Vernon Yeah.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 28Mike 2 types of rentals I see is; 1. Where the person rents a boat, and they take
the boat wherever they want to go. Not too much of that happening
around I’ll tell ya. And the other type of rental is a control rental. They
are renting the boat, and whatever they need, but they are going from
point A to point B. Many times there is an employee going along with
them. Groups and things like that. Then when they get down river they
need somebody to take them back up where they started. So those are
really the two, and I think there’s more of the later going on than the
former. That’s how I see it. And it would be difficult to do it
unsupervised.
Vernon For me it’s nice cause I don’t have to worry about taking them back
because they end with me. I got a confluence of 2 rivers. I got the river I
got the Appalachian Trail a mile up Rte.78, and a block up on Rte. 61.
Dr. Hibbs So, you’ve got everything but people. Is it accurate to say there are no
down sides to the river being there, and nothing but advantages to being
located by the river, as a generalization? Now, we don’t have a location,
we don’t have facilities. Is that accurate to say?
Mike Yeah, I think so. Like you said, you don’t necessarily have to be on the
river if you can have a facility on the river, and run it. Or as he said, an
existing business might be brought in, and what he meant by limiting
your overhead. You’re actually having an existing business going, and
you can run this on the side somewhere. But again, the key point is
having it on the river. No question as I see it.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., what would the surrounding area look like? In other words, we
talked about this idea of having signs where businesses that you would
think would ideally support people using the trail would be. Remember
we discussed that in the beginning? O.K., so that’s what I’m kind of
talking about here. Is there a good idea to link this to business? I’ll leave
it as simple as that. Is it a good idea to locate one of these things next to
services that would commonly be found in a borough?
Jack I think so.
Dr. Hibbs When you say that Jack, it reinforces what I said a minute ago in my
mind, about the one on the Delaware, Pt. Pleasant. Cause there’s nothing
there. Ya know what I’m saying? So that’s when we say that being in a
borough is a plus. O.K. Integrating all facilities and putting them together
in one spot is a plus. I think there is something here because we can plan
it. That really does increase the success for probability. That the
probability for a success rate for a business. If we’re in agreement of not
just going alone. Anyone want to jump on that?
Bob It’s kind of a no brainer. If you locate your business where your people
are, the communities.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 29Dr. Hibbs Yes, one aspect. But we’re also going back to the facilities that are there.
The supporting businesses that are in town. Those are also areas that are
going to enhance the success of the business. Especially in those first few
years, I think. The Schuylkill River Heritage Area stretches from
Philadelphia to the Pottsville/Tamaqua area. If you were to locate along
the Heritage Area, in what general area would you locate an outfitter type
store and why? Is there an exact location that you think lends itself to a
retail location? Now there may not be any thoughts on this at all, at this
point. But what I was hoping I might emerge is somebody saying; “No as
we’re talking here what occurs to me is there might be a spot here, or
there might be a spot here, or there may be a spot there. That would be a
natural place that we might investigate”
Bob I would say somewhere between Reading and Pottstown. Why? You’re
pretty much half way down the river, alright. So that if you were taking
canoeing trips, bicycles, to the headwaters. You’re not, you’re splitting it
down the middle. So that you’re only going half way. Versus going
downriver to pick people up. You’re only going half way.
Dr. Hibbs If we could run with that somewhere between Reading and Pottstown, do
you think of a natural split place in between those two boundaries.
Mike Yeah, I think Birdsboro. I know it from the water.
Dr. Hibbs So what do you think Birdsboro has to offer?
Mike It’s half way between pretty much. It does have facilities. There are
places to get food. There are businesses. Ya know, geographically it’s
about half way between two population areas Pottstown and Reading.
Bob The access to the river’s there.
Mike Yeah, like he said, it’s about half way down the river itself. And there’s
not a lot going on just outside of Birdsboro either way.
Dr. Hibbs That’s a point of comparison. And I don’t want anyone offended either. I
have a preconceived idea of where this thing is gonna go. Compare
Birdsboro with the backyard right here. And what do you think are the
pros and cons of these two locations. Please, everyone feel free to jump
in.
Mike I think Pottstown probably has more to offer. Definitely has more to offer
than Birdsboro. And certainly is on its way to making some scenic views,
sure. Although just below Birdsboro, and just above is pretty nice as
well.
Dr. Hibbs What kind of distance are we talking about between Birdsboro and
Pottstown?
Jack It’s about 10 miles. Cycling wise I would skip over Birdsboro, and go all
the way to Reading. From Reading coming from Philly I’d want to stop
here in Pottstown for rest, cause it’s about 2 hours each way by bike.
Canoe wise, Birdsboro would be a good trail jumping off point from
Reading down.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 30Bob I would think anywhere between Reading and Pottstown here would be a
sight, a good place to be. I think the bigger question becomes; where is
an open area you could use? Alright. Cause for boats, for bicycles, you’re
going to need a fairly large area to store this equipment.
Dr. Hibbs You bring up an excellent point there, and that’s beyond the scope of
what we’re doing now. Let’s do the same thing again. Let’s take a look at
Reading to Hamburg. Is there any area there? Or is that general area out
for a given reason. Ya know what I’m saying?
Jack Up near Manahockasy some guy wants to build a racetrack up there, and
on the side he wants to put up a camping center. Which the bike trail will
be running through, past the river.
Dr. Hibbs That would help, say that name again.
Jack Manahockasy
Dr. Hibbs Manahockasy? Where’s that at?
Bob That’s up around Doylestown (Juniata County?). There was a livery
there.
All It was successful. I think there were liability issues.
Kurt I don’t think that was the issue. The issue was the kids were basically
running it, and they both went back to school.
Hugh Up in that area, right across the road, is one of the roads going into
French Creek State Park.
Dr. Hibbs How about Hamburg to Pottsville?
Vernon Port Clinton!
Dr. Hibbs Vernon does that strike any interest in you of incorporating other…. Like
right now you’re just, what. You’re not in bikes right? You are boats.
Vernon Backpacks and kayaks.
Dr. Hibbs Backpacks and kayaks.
Vernon And everything to go with those.
Dr. Hibbs O.K., during this discussion has anything occurred to you that might be
of interest to bringing into your business, and why?
Vernon I’ve already worked through this in my head. I’ve been through this stuff
with myself a million times, what you’re doing now.
Dr. Hibbs Vernon, do you think there would be any advantages to you opening up a
second location in these areas that are South of where you’re at now?
Vernon I don’t have the money to do it. Sure, yeah, if I had the money I could do
a lot of things.
Dr. Hibbs Deirdre, thank you for coming.
Dr. Hibbs Do we want to go to the other end now? Bob, do we want to go from
Pottstown to Philadelphia? Cause now you’re getting into the population.
And because of that, there would be more areas that might offer
opportunities.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 31Bob I’m thinking of the Phoenixville, Mont Clare area. Lock 60, they’re
already doing things to draw in people. If you could locate very closely to
that on either side of the river, you would have a market looking for you.
And you know, what business wouldn’t desire that?
Dr. Hibbs What do you think are the attributes that would be appealing?
Bob Down there?
Dr. Hibbs Yes
Bob You have some businesses that would help attract the public to your area.
Once I can attract them I can sell them, or at least I can try. In Lock 60
they have a nice park there, alright?
Dr. Hibbs Give us a place name, cause Lock 60 means nothing to me,
Bob Mont Clare, right across the river from Phoenixville. You have 2 towns.
Mont Clare is a small one, Phoenixville a little larger. Mont Clare has the
canal walk.
Dr. Hibbs Is that where they ski?
Bob No that’s further down.
Dr. Hibbs Oh, that’s down further.
Bob Mont Clare will be a very good area. Reason being, between Pottsville
and Mont Clare there are no dams. Once you to get to Mont Claire, now
you’re dealing with dams. They’re a pain in the butt. At Mont Clare
you’re at the first major dam, and the Yankee dam is there, and they’re
not allowing anybody to run.
Dr. Hibbs After this we will wrap it up. Yes, Vernon.
Vernon This is off the wall. Obviously there’s a purpose to this for everybody,
but who’s really benefiting here?
Dr. Hibbs As far as you guys go?
Vernon Where does this information go?
Dr. Hibbs Let me back up one step. I felt that the most natural place to start in
looking for someone that would be successful in opening up in this area,
is somebody who’s already in business. That’s the most fertile ground.
That’s the most stocked pond you’re gonna fish in. O.k.? So that’s the
one reason is to see, number one, if anyone else shared that similar
thought. To give an example, in the swimming pool business, and I was
in that business for some 20 years, the chemical manufacturers would
come into you, and say; “you’re doing everything right, it’s your
business. You need to think about a second location. Now we’re going to
do anything we can to help support you at a second location”.
Vernon Are you the chemical manufacturer?
Dr. Hibbs No, I was the retailer.
Vernon No, but I’m saying…
Dr. Hibbs The chemical manufacturer was selling to me…
Vernon You’re missing my point. I’m saying are you the chemical manufacturer
in this scenario? The chemical manufacturer says to you, you’re sales are
really good I’m…
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 32Bob He’s the consultant in this scenario.
Dr. Hibbs Actual situation was the chemical manufacturer is coming to meet a
retailer, o.k.
Vernon O.K.
Dr. Hibbs And saying we like everything you’re doing in your business. We’ve
seen how you’re growing in your business. At some point you’re going to
have gotten all you can out of this location. We think you’re a natural
person to be thinking about a second location. What can we do to help
you in deciding where that second location could be? Because if you go
into a second location you’re going to benefit us in the long run.
Kurt We’re really the chemical salesmen, because they’re going to give the
information to us. We’re gonna say wow, the numbers look really good
here. We could use another 2 businesses along the Schuylkill River. Then
we’re going to come to you and say, hey how about going to another
location. If it doesn’t work for you, then we go look to somebody else to
start a business for us.
Dr. Hibbs Vernon I don’t think there’s any grand plan here.
Vernon I’m not looking for any grand plan, it just seemed like sort of a strange
thing…
Dr. Hibbs We’re not reinventing the wheel. Rather then me go through a lot of
investigating. What works for you, what works for you, what works for
you, what doesn’t work for you, what doesn’t work for you? Let’s put it
on the table. You’re successful. You’ve been here for 10 years. Are you
thinking about a second location, and what do you think of this idea? You
know, somebody says we’re looking for a second location, everything
you said just stunk. I’m interested in hearing that. Does that help?
Wayne I think what Vernon might be concerned about is that he’s helping a
potential new competitor come in the Heritage Area. I think the way this
is worded I think the results of the study could help Vernon in his
business, versus helping somebody come in. I think all of these
businesses here could be looking at a new opportunity and want to find
out what the opportunities are to expand their businesses, and find new
niches.
Kurt The other thing I want to say is that the information we get from this
study, we’ll make available to all of you. If it helps you enhance your
business, or grow your business, we’ve already achieved partial success.
We want your businesses to succeed and grow, and we want to place
some more businesses here if we can.
Dr. Hibbs Vernon, would you agree that it was better to have you guys come to the
table, rather than us operate without knowing your input?
Vernon Sure I’m glad for these guys, ya know, show up to make sure nothin’s
going wrong, cause somebody has to protect it as well. That’s a major
concern of mine. Obviously because of my business, but not just for that.
But because it is recreation for me too.
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 33Dr. Hibbs O.K. What were, or are the hurdles you encountered when you opened
your business? Is there anything the Schuylkill River Heritage Area can
you do to help a new business start up, and avoid the hurdles you
encountered? How long did it take to consider your business safe and
secure? You can see where my question earlier was coming from Vernon,
with that. So, let’s start out with the first one. What were/are the hurdles
you encountered when opening up your business? Bryan can you chime
in on that one?
Bryan Well it worked out pretty well for me. I had to push a little bit, but as far
as using the trail itself as a business. Ah, you’re using the trail as
basically your business. I mean if the trail isn’t there, then basically your
business is gone, for me renting surreys. I ran it by Ron Albright the
director of Parks and Recreation, and the county commissioners. They
gave a verbal o.k. But some people started complaining about my surreys
running them off the road and what not. Going forward it may be more
like location, finding a commercial property along the trail.
Dr. Hibbs No major hurdles? Any idea how long it’s gonna take you to break even?
If anyone feels uncomfortable with these types of questions, then don’t
answer them.
Bryan Yeah, I mean, I have no idea. Like you were saying, it’s a part time
business, unless you can get a couple other ideas. I think getting back to
what you were saying about picking a location. Some of it is just being a
smart businessperson. More so then location, I think. Like he was talking
about the guy with flashy signs. Even though his location might stink, but
because of his signs.
Dr. Hibbs To compensate.
Bryan More important, I would say that’s 70% of the success factor of the
business. I don’t know.
Dr. Hibbs Vernon, you’re kind of a newbie still.
Vernon For me being a retailer, which I opened up for 3 weeks, and I realized I
was in retail. I’ve never worked retail in my life. I just started out
providing a service, and the next thing you know I’m sellin’ stuff.
Getting the inventory was my biggest thing. I had to pay for everything
before I went into my store.
Dr. Hibbs No trade credit, you’re saying.
Vernon Not at all, none, zero.
Dr. Hibbs Is that common in the industry you’re in?
Hugh That all depends. When I started out I was in landscaping. I couldn’t
believe how people looked at me. You know, you’re putting out money. I
never had this experience before. They think you’re not going to pay
your bills and this and that.
Dr. Hibbs You ‘re the one that sort of evolved into this?
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 34Hugh Then when we got into the boats, that wasn’t any problem. I mean the
first company we went to was Old Town. We already had a business
going, ya know. We just bought a few boats, and they agreed to do it, and
they’ve been good as far as protection. There are a lot of things. I can
understand Vernon. He’s sitting over here thinking this guy right over
here in Pottstown. He may want to start a place down here. This guy is
right down the road here. He’s gonna put a rental by the park, and I’m
gonna get what’s left on the upper part of the river. But I can tell you I’m
not interested in rental.
Vernon Nah, I’m not thinking that..
Hugh Maybe you aren’t, but I’m just telling you that right now. You can see the
gray hair on my head.
Dr. Hibbs And Vernon yours is starting, and you just don’t know it yet. Let’s get
back to the hurdles, if you will.
Hugh The hurdle, well money is an important thing. Usually you want to make
the bank your partner rather then your friends. Because I had people
when I first started…I was a chemistry teacher up at Daniel Boone in
Birdsboro, and when I left them. There were people who said; “Yeah,
we’ll be your silent partners”. I just avoided that because it’s better to be
dealing with the bank, even if you have the feeling there’s more risk.
Because at least then you’re making the decisions. You don’t have
somebody who’s not doing any of the work telling you that you’re not
making enough money because you’re doing this all wrong.
Dr. Hibbs That’s assuming you can get money from the bank.
Hugh Well yeah. That’s true, that’s true.
Mike Another hurdle I see is insurance. Liability insurance in particular.
Especially in Reading. If you’re gonna be renting, especially with water
craft of any kind. My God, it’s not only do you have to really keep an eye
on your business, and have people that are with these people all the time
making sure it’s done right. Just the liability insurance alone. We all
know what the situation with liability is nationwide. Specifically a
somewhat dangerous possibility of danger involved in canoeing and
kayaking, or tubing for that matter.
Dr. Hibbs Mike, if you feel uncomfortable answering this, don’t answer it, o.k.
What do you think the percentage is of your sales that are eaten up by
liability insurance?
Mike I really don’t know without looking at…
Dr. Hibbs Another angle then. You’re renting boats…
Mike No, I don’t.
Dr. Hibbs You don’t?
Mike No
Dr. Hibbs Vernon, do you feel comfortable talking about, uh, uh, liability
insurance?
Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 35Vernon It’s thirty five hundred a year. How many boats you gotta rent, pay that
out….
Bob O.K. That’s what you’re paying a year. That’s not bad actually.
Hugh If you want to be in the rental you have to be young, and not have to
many assets they can take away from you.
Dr. Hibbs Understood, understood.
Vernon That’s the way I look at it right now. If it ever comes to the point where
I’ve got something that they can take….
Dr. Hibbs You’re not going to be renting. (Laughter)
Mike And there’s something that really is key to what you’re trying to do here.
The rental part of it, especially the water craft is really, and tubes and
whatnot. That’s a key feature here of why a lot of people don’t want to do
it. Because of the pitfalls. Insurance is certainly one of them, also the
rental, whether it’s the property, building or whatever….
Tape runs out.

Schuylkill River NSHA Focus Group 36
